I hope. I believe it's already connected and now
we'll see if it's actually picking up sound in the
room. Let's see, I'll ask some questions. All of
your family is from Texas, right? You want to take
it right here? Yeah, I'll play it back to you.
Well, not right now. It's for a demonstration now.
Well, I'm from here. He's from Mexico. What town
are you from? Bustamante. Bustamante.
Tamaulipas. Tamaulipas. There are two
Bustamantes. Yes. Nuevo León. Yes, I know this.
Near Monterrey. Yes. And the other Bustamante is
very far. On the other side of Victoria. On the
other side of Victoria. And it's the house of your
mother and father? Yes, my brother and father. But
are they all from Mexico? Yes. And what is your
father's name? Severino, Severino Medina.
Severino Medina. And your mother? Taurina.
Taurina. In what year did they come to the United
States? In 1918. What was the reason they came?
What do you mean?
What was the reason? Why did they come? They came
for the war. For the war? For the revolution. They
didn't have... What kind of work did your father
have in Mexico?
He was here. He didn't know what kind of work,
because there was no work. What was
the reason for the revolution? How old were you
when you came here?
How old were you? I came when I was 15. I was the
oldest. 15? 15 years old. The other boys came when
they were little. OK.
good as mine. And he was telling me something. . . . .
.
We came on foot and then we took the train at night
for a while. The next day we walked on foot. How long
did it take? How long did it take for your uncle to
get out of
there? My uncle took about a month or five weeks.
And how was it possible to eat?
What did your family eat? What did they eat? Yes,
what did they eat? Well, almost bread, only bread
and water. Sometimes there was everything, but
there was nothing to buy. My uncle brought money,
just limited, little. Yes. Yes. Yes.
Is there
any
illness
there? Fernando came sick. Yes, one or two boys
came, little ones, my brothers came sick. Yes.
Well, if there was nothing to eat, well, give him a
doctor and all that, because there was nothing to
eat. And the water, was it good or bad? Well, what we
found, sometimes a little good, sometimes bad.
Yes. And what time of year was it? What year? What
time of year?
In this month, the 8th, the 8th of January, the
18th, we passed the royal. And are there soldiers?
No. Are there problems with soldiers? Well, they
came to us with fear and they never saw us. And God
did not see us and covered us because there can be no
other way. And for what reason did he decide to
leave his people? At this time, is there a very big,
special problem or something else? Yes. Because
that year, the uncle decided to go to Taerios. They
had a very different year, Frivi and all. An uncle.
But they walked hidden until San Antonio. Yes.
From San Antonio They came to College Station in a
bus. No, from Laredo they came in a bus. They spent
the whole year. Locked up, without food, without
drink. Plus the driver brought them. That's where
those two sick creatures came from. What year did
they arrive at College Station? Here, what can I
say? The same year, in the same month, yes. He
wanted to know the date of the year, right? I mean,
it seems like the 15th, the 17th. The 18th. The 18th
they arrived. The 18th? For what reason did they
come here, to Bryan? No, we were outside of Bryan,
at the ranch. It's a ranch close to here? Yes, it's
about 25,000. We came here in... 1944. We lived in
Texas. Yes. But when we came from Mexico, we went to
work in a ranch 20 miles away from here. Yes.
¿Y su papá fue campesino o comerciante? No,
comenzaron a trabajar en Desenraiz con un... Para
limpiar tierra, para sembrar. ¿En México? No,
aquí. ¿Aquí? Sí, 20 millas afuera de Brown. Y aquí
nos venimos hace unos 25 años, nos venimos para...
But before what, in Bustamante, what kind of work
did he have? Well, just sowing, reed corn, you
know. That's the main thing in Mexico. Yes. Did he
have his own land? We lived there on a ranch and it
never rained. I don't know how we make a living.
They irrigated, they were irrigation lands. Yes.
Did you own the land? No, no. Did you rent it? No, I
didn't. I was with someone else, with the owners of
the land. Ah, yes. And then, in 1918, your mother
and father went to the United States. My
grandfather, my grandmother. And you. and two
sons-in-law, one son-in-law came with their
grandparents. You are Mr.
Medina and your other name is? He is Medina.
Medina. Alquilio C. Medina. Alquilio C. Medina.
Alquilio C. Medina. Alquilio C. Medina. And his
mother and father and the whole family. Medina.
His brothers. And his uncle? His name was Juan
Contreras. His mother's brother? Yes, his
mother's brother. And he came to Texas first? Yes,
he was here, he was many years old. He and her father
always lived in the same ranch. Oh, his family
still knows your family. Yes. Because his aunt...
My father was from his people. Very close, very
retired. My mother was nothing. But she was from
Texas and he was from Mexico. And they know each
other. They are very distant relatives. Very
distant. Very distant. But they were very close
people. And for this reason, your family came to
Wheelback during these years. Yes. And
for how many years? When did you find him? When did
he find you? Me and him? Yes. Well, we got married in
1920. El 15 de octubre. She was 15. That's what I'm
saying. That's what I'm saying. Just the little
kids and they got married. They got married in
1920. I don't want to say this because... He was 18
and I was 16 years old. He is older than me, 4 years.
Yes. How
many
years
does
he live in Wheelock?
About 30 years. In what year did you come here to
Bryan? In 1942, I think. And what kind of work do you
have here in Bryan? Well, just looking for work.
The first years, I worked as a baker. And I worked as
a butcher. Y después buscamos trabajo aquí en él. Y
yo comencé a trabajar en un garage. Sí. Él comenzó a
trabajar en College Station, en un comedor, ¿te
acuerdas? Pero después. Después del garage.
Y trabajé una temporada en el garage. Y luego paré y
fui a College Station.
Allí pues... I worked in a dining room, washing
dishes, sweeping, mapping.
From there, I would go to the car station, and I
would come back to the garage.
And... I still remember that day. I forgot the
material. And have you ever returned to Mexico to
visit? No, we haven't returned there. No? No. He
left something out. He retired when he got hurt on
his eye. Ah. He retired. He retired. In what year
did you retire? In what year did he retire? He
retired three years ago. Three years ago. Three
years ago, yes. And you never want to visit Mexico?
Well, no, we don't have money. That's another
reason. And I say that you need money because here
the neighbors go and they bring a lot of money. Yes.
What kind of house does your family have in Mexico?
Do you remember? It's from Madero
or what? Your house, your family's house in
Mexico, in Bustamante. What kind of house? Well,
houses like the ones in Aguas Pobres, they look
like they're... They're old? No, they're...
What's it called, Amara? It was like straw. They
made different houses, but like garbage. They
tied it up. They made carts out of it. Carrizo.
Carrizo, I don't know how they call it. Have you
seen that big bush over there that looks like corn?
Yes. That's what I told you it was carrizo. They dry
it and they stop it like this. Yes. And they put
leaves like this and then they add carrizo. Ah,
yes. You must have seen some when they went to
Mexico. Look like a tins. Tins, something like
tins. Like this. Oh, yes. I think I've seen houses
like that in Tlamalipas. Sí. Sí.
Have you seen anyone? I haven't seen him, but his
mother and the people from the medical center. Ah,
his mother says all these things. They put
tortillas like this on their arms. They burned
firewood and they put a comal like this and they put
tortillas. And they hid them because they heard
them and they came and took them away. They
suffered a lot in Mexico. That's why he didn't want
to go to Mexico. I don't blame you. I'll never go. I
never want to go. I don't want to. Why not? It's very
nice. I do want to go one day. One day I want to go
there. I don't like it. I want to go to the ranch
where my father and mother live. Ah, the ranch. My
mother lives there. Yes? Your mother lives there?
In Mexico? In the ranch. Ah, yes. The two of them are
dead. Yes. One day, I want to go back. This young man
is the one who has gone from the whole family to
Mexico. Those two have gone, but this one has been
in the family home of his wife. Yes. In Aguas
Calientes. Ah. And from there, he has been to
Monterrey and all that. I don't know, I don't know.
You know, on vacation they go see them. They've got
people in the nest. His wife, family, they live in
the nest. He is very handsome. Then there was
nothing to do with him, just the firewood. Yes.
Now, my sister-in-law says that there is beauty in
some parts. In Bustamante? Yes. Yes. But in the
past? No. Just the firewood. There were schools
there when you were a child? There were schools?
Yes, before the war. When the war, there was
nothing. In what year began, how do you say began?
The war began there. 1810. 1910. 1910.
Y su familia vive en este pueblo con la guerra para
ocho años? Pues el papá de él se fue con los
soldados. Y él se quedó a atender la familia.
¿Usted? Mi papá se lo llevaron. Vente, vamos. No,
que mi mamá no vente, vamos. They took
him away. I don't know what happened. I was older,
and the other two were younger. I don't know what my
mother did for us. My father wasn't there. He
didn't have any money or anything. And your father
was a soldier? What kind of general was he? Zapata
was a general. Pancho Viena? Yes, with Carranza
and Villa. Carranza and Villa. But your father
returned to Bustamente in what year? Yes, he was
lucky that he returned. And then there was nothing
to eat, there was nothing, no work. It came to mind.
He had an idea of where there was enough corn to eat.
Yes. And he said, before my children, these
creatures die of hunger, let's go there. And so he
took us to a place where there was a lot of water, a
lot of corn. People died not of hunger, but of
sickness. Very sick, because they drank river
water. There was no water left to drink from the
river. What is this river called?
The river of Santa Ingracia. From Santa Ingracia?
Yes, I think you live there. I know him! You live in
Mexico, I think I know him. In your town, right?
Yes, I know him. Bustamante is close to Santa
Ingracia? From Hacienda de Santa Ingracia? From
Nuevo León, yes. It's over here. How many miles,
more or less, separated are the two places? How
many miles separated are they? I don't have an
idea. About 300 miles. 300? Well, that's quite
far. But the river was... There was a place called
La Cruz. Yes. It's close to Santa Yengra. Another
place where the train stops. The train that comes
from there, it goes from here to Monterrey, and it
stops there at La Cruz. Ah. La Cruz and Santé András
are in the middle, not very far, one of
the two. And that's the name of the river, the Santé
András River. It's where a lot of people were sick.
Yes. But it's during this trip. this disease was
during the trip? When they got sick? Yes, well,
some of them came, and one of them had already got
up, and other sick people came, and my uncle said,
well, let's go. Well, this boy is very bad. You
know, wherever he dies, we bury him. We have to keep
walking. Like the Israelis. But all these people
would have stayed there. But God puts the means. Do
you understand me? Yes. They started writing to
the uncle. Yes. By letters. Yes. And we, as we were
here, he said, my father's name was Ignacio, his
name was Juan. He went and told him, Ignacio, my
father is very bad there, my sister, my
brother-in-law. They are very bad there. What do
you think? What will we do? The two of them were from
Mexico. Yes. Today we are going to gather this
family and the other and we will help you. Many
helped that uncle so that he could bring them. And
he left alone. He left alone with a bag of clothes
only for him. He knew very well that he was going to
suffer there. But they... They were just running
away. They were just in a house. It was dark and it
didn't dawn. He put them all in motion and they all
came. His father, his mother, his grandmother,
his grandson, his grandchildren, his
grandchildren, because they had already buried
three of the virgulas. There was only one behind
the other. And when they came from there, they came
in pain because they had left their daughters
buried. but they were running away from that
revolution. They couldn't eat, they couldn't
make their food, because if they made it, they
would smell it, they would add tortillas, they
would smell it, and they would come and take it
away. If they brought a blanket, they would take it
away. All they wanted was to live. But his father
was already free from the revolution, they had
already left him. The worst thing he did was to
leave. And they came, And he transported them by
boat. Yes. They didn't go by, you know, by train or
something. No, they went by boat. One behind the
other, one behind the other. And they were hidden
in a house. Yes. And in that house, there was a bus
that picked them up to San Antonio. From San
Antonio. Yes, from San Antonio. He sent Ken out of
here to bring them. Then they walked in huayines.
Do you know what huayines are? Huayin. Huayin.
Huayin. They were two big huayines. Yes, from all
over. From the family that he had here. And they
brought them. I remember well. I was little. I was
nine years old. Yes. I was nine years old. Y todos
nos juntamos a dar ropa, a dar comida cuando ellos
vinieran. Sí. Y en Guadalini, entre las nieves,
muchos veían. Pero así venían todas cobijaditas
de luto, todas muchachas, no muchachas que estas,
todas de luto porque habían dejado hermanos,
sobrinos, enterrados. Un tío de él fue afusilado
en esa guerra por malicia. And my mother-in-law
cried a lot and said, when I got married, she told me
from there, if you saw how sad the revolution is,
you don't know. When they shot my brother, she
said, did you know what time it was when the sun came
out? Did you know what time they were going to shoot
him? And where they shot him, so close to our house.
My mom and we were all in that corner, praying,
asking God for the brother who was going to be shot.
And they heard the shots. Oh, it was so sad. But they
suffered a lot. Yes. That uncle of his had just been
shot when they came here. His name was... What was
his name? Petronilo. Petronilo Contreras. They
just shot them because at that time, even if they
didn't go, they would say, you did it, you did it.
And as they grabbed one here, the police, don't
talk. But they shot them.
It's a very sad story. We went from being wet. You
know what wet is. Mojado? Wet? All mojado. Wet
bags. Oh, all mojado. Y después aquí tuvimos que
arreglar. No quisieron echarnos, pero
arreglamos y pagamos los... In these years, there
aren't many people on the border to make papers,
right? Now, yes, we have the papers. But they were
reporting for many years that they weren't from
here. Yes. It was a bad past, yes. But they said,
well, let's go to Langley.
But in the citizenship papers, there they had to
say what the reason was for them to come here. And
they had a very big excuse, because defending
life, you know. Yes, yes, I think so. That's why
they were forgiven. But it's a very delicate thing
to say that. But in the scriptures it says that
there was a very big reason for them to run away.
Yes. And that uncle was the one who saved all those
people.
But now you are a citizen. When I married him, they
told me that I had lost my citizenship here. That he
had made me Mexican. But a lot of people told me, fix
your papers, because if you don't fix your papers,
he can't be a citizen. And I fixed my papers, and I
said, well, why if I'm here? But he was from there.
At that time, they made one of them. Now they
don't. And I fixed my papers, and he fixed his.
Because with my papers, I made him a citizen. Yes.
But that's how my in-laws and their citizens have
been doing it. Many of my brothers-in-law have
become citizens. And he is a citizen. So he doesn't
have to report anything anymore. He reports his
portrait
of his land. And your grandparents, do they like it
here? No, they don't like it anymore. No, he died,
he's buried in a hole. But when they came here,
did they like life here? Yes. One thing they didn't
like was that he had put corn tortillas Y le daban,
no, yo no quiero. La tortilla de harina no la
quería, que le hacía mal. Eso era lo único que no le
gustaba a ella. Lo demás sí, todo
le gustaba. ¿Y su mamá y papá también le gusta? Sí,
sí.
And even if he doesn't like it, he has whatever he
wants. He's very old. My father is old, but he's
still alive. Your father is still alive? Yes. How
old are you? Seventy-seven. Seventy-seven years
old. Quite old. He still roams around, you know?
What are you going to show him? Look, that is it. The
daddy, you know? Yes. Oh, it's your mama? Uh-huh.
No, she's dead. Oh, she's, uh-huh. That's daddy,
granddaddy. He's leaving, but she's dead. But
where does he live? He lives not even two blocks
from here. Right here. Down behind that golf
station, down the road. That's my granddaddy.
That's daddy's van. You know that golf station
over here? Yeah. Right behind
it. Maybe he would like to. He might like to. That
would be... If one of you could take me and
introduce me to him, All
right. Sometime during the week, I could call you
and ask if it would be a good day. Because he might
like to tell about it, and he could maybe say some
things that he would remember having been older
than you. He has his own? Yes. Ah, how nice to make
this story about him too. Where is your town? What?
Your town. Your hometown. Oh, me? From Missouri?
Neosho, Missouri. Missouri?
Yes. And then my family came to Texas when I had...
Diez y cuatro años. Casi la misma con usted vienen a
Texas. Diez y cuatro años. Catorce. Catorce.
Gracias. Yo me olvido mucho español. Bueno, 14
años. Y viven en Huntsville. Es que cerca de aquí. Y
después yo fueron a Louisiana para mis estudios en
la universidad. Y me encuentro mi esposo allá. Y él
es de Louisiana. Oh. Él es un, bueno, su familia de
Louisiana es un parte, un parte francesa. or
Cajun, a part German, a part Irish. How do you say
Irish? No, no, no. Irish. From Ireland. From
Ireland and also from Spain. From Spain. And also
another part of England and Scotland. My brother
is a teacher in a school out there. The little one is
a teacher in a school out there. But he's from
Louisiana, right? Yes, my husband. This little
boy spent about three or four months in Louisiana
National
Guard. He finished college and then he went to
Virginia. There are a lot of French people in
Louisiana. Yes, a lot. How many children do you
have?
Nine. Nine? That's good.
Six sisters, six daughters. And three brothers.
Children. And the older brothers. No one's home,
everybody's married. Were you the last one to
marry? I'm the last one to marry. Are you the
youngest? He was the baby one, and then he beat me,
and I was the last one, you know, to get married. And
this is one of your sons? Ah, sobrino. El que
agarramos allá. Pero estos... They take in
summer.
They was taken
in
summer. And you know... And you know one of our
brothers-in-law,
they're already
there.
He died. This one. How sad. This is his husband.
Yes. And him? He's in LABO. Ah, LABO. What kind of
work does he have? He's an airport specialist.
Yes.
This is my oldest daughter. Yes. And the oldest
son-in-law. Yes. And where does he live? Here he
lives in Brine. Only he and she live in Love. And
what kind of work does he have? He works in the shoe
shop. Ah, yes. And him? This is my son. Ah, your son
is very handsome. Thank you. He's a barber in
Calistice. Yes. This is his wife. This is him. Yes.
And this is her. He got
9th
graders and 12th graders.
He's a PhD. He can be a teacher.
He's a coach. He's a coach right now. A coach.
And he's working. Oh, he's already got it. Yeah.
Yeah. He's a teacher. Does he teach at the college?
Or he teaches at the college here? No, not the
college. At the high school. At the high school.
Mm-hmm. Oh. This one right here, look. It's the
same. Surgery. Oh,
well, surgery. I don't know. I can explain.
Family. And this one, this is my baby.
He's a
teacher. He's a teacher.
Coach. Coach. and around the school bus. This is
another one. This is the one on the side. It's this
one. It's this one. Where is the whole family? Down
there. Oh, here. That's her and him with their
family.
Sally and Mamie, and Rich and David and Mamie. How
beautiful, the children.
She has a job like him. He inspects
airplanes, he doesn't work, he just inspects
airplanes. Y esto es toda mi familia. Aquí no hay un
yerno. Aquí no hay una nuera. Es nomás la familia.
Ah.
Este
es la más chica. This is her
baby.
Rosie. I was
looking at it. I think it's run out. This was the one
that was making the noise. The first one and the
last one. This is the last one. The last one and the
first one. See? The oldest one and the last one.
This is the baby. It doesn't look like it here. I'm
telling you, baby, you were very pretty when you
were little, but now you're very ugly. Where is the
other picture?
This one. Yo le digo, ahora estás muy feo. No, no es
feo. Pero mire, cuando nos vinimos para acá, así
estaba él. Y se retrató en una pera ella. Y ya
estábamos con los belices listos para venirnos
para acá. Tengo retratos. Qué bonito,
familia. Estos son los dos hermanos y las dos
hermanas, las que están ahorita en el hospital.
They married two brothers and two sisters.
Carmen and James. Oh, what a pretty dress. Where
are they going? She made the party. Ella lo hizo.
Sí. She made. Mm. Beautiful. They were having a
dance, a dance, and they had to wear a kimono.
Mm-hmm. She, that looks, that's... Oh, she is
pretty. These are sisters. No, no, no. They're the
same one. The same one. Mm-hmm. She got those two
babies married. Mm. Oh, they're pretty, too. Oh,
thank you.
There's the teacher. There's the teacher. And
he's got a little baby, too. And they've been
married five years already. Is she from here, or is
she from somewhere? She's from Port Arthur. From
Port Arthur. This is the teacher. She's a Spanish
teacher. Well, she teaches both languages, you
know. Mire, estos son tres hijos de este. De este.
De este, de este. De este. Uh-huh.
Oh, all musicians. Oh. Hey, they're handsome.
Look, he's done. Well, they're all freaky. But
that's a big one, and there's a second, and there's
a third. It's a little one. But he don't like it. One
of them, the oldest, is going to get married by the
third of November. He's going to get married with
one of his nurses.
He's cute. They're all cute. Well, their father is
muy guapo.
That's the same one. Here it is with them.